this video is a critique of the
therapeutic approach
of dr k he's a guy who's genuinely
trying to help people and the purpose of
this video is to argue
that his methods are genuinely mistaken
genuinely wrong i completely recognize
that he has good intentions this is a
critique
not a rant i'm not claiming he's wrong
about
everything overall i'd suggest that his
advice
is bad for most people most of the time
not for everyone not all the time dr k's
approach
has several distinctive aspects he
regards video game playing as
partly positive and partly negative
he tries to coach you on how to have the
positive aspects
without the negative my own bias in this
discussion
is that i would not sympathize with this
sort of
have your cake and eat it to approach
not even with something very simple like
drinking alcohol
eating meat so on and so forth if you're
talking to someone who has struggled
their whole life with being an alcoholic
is it useful to claim that drinking
alcohol
has benefits and let me just say i'm
completely detached self-critical and
nihilistic about this
i can see the benefits of drinking
alcohol in this society in this
culture i can see the benefits of eating
meat
in the society this culture if you spend
your time
going out and drinking alcohol and
eating meat and you live in
canada or scotland or
poland or the ukraine many other
cultures that are dominated by
alcohol drinking and mediating as the
main mode of socialization
there are benefits but i don't think
my position if i'm trying to help
alcoholics
is to argue on that basis and i don't
think there's any coherent
ethical argument that would admit
even part-time alcoholism part-time
meat-eating
so on and so forth so as i've just said
dr k
differs from me in trying to keep the
positive
while minimizing the negative he speaks
at length about the unique
positive qualities of friendships made
through playing video games he talks
about video games as something
meaningful in the player's life another
interesting contrast
here would be to gambling as a pastime
at some point we have to stop and ask
ourselves is gambling
positive or negative is gambling harmful
is it ethical you know is it justifiable
in your life even the waste of time
you're you're let's say you have kids
you're a parent but you're spending all
your time
going and gambling even if you don't
lose money even if you break even every
time
if we're questioning gambling or we're
coaching someone who's struggling with a
gambling problem
i'm not sure how comfortable any of us
would be with dr k's approach
friendship also is a very difficult
thing to use
to justify your choices in life
some people make friends participating
in prostitution
i'm using the vague verb participating
here
quite intentionally however
they do not necessarily make friends
through prostitution that's not the
purpose
of prostitution and they may make
enemies instead or they may remain
isolated and alone some people
make friends getting an mba studying
business studying finance studying
commerce
in university and you would be surprised
if you look at advertisements for
mba programs they often ruthlessly try
to market this kind of friendship to you
like oh
pay thousands of dollars to study
business administration you'll make
friends
well well will i if you enroll as a
student
you will not necessarily make friends
through the process of education that's
not the purpose of education
you may make enemies instead you may
remain isolated alone now
let me just ask do you think you can get
a refund from the university
if you say hey this is false advertising
i signed up because you promised me that
i'd make friends and colleagues in
business
is this is this really true now
both of these examples that i have on
screen right now
prostitution and going back to
university to get an mba
i think it's actually very very
difficult to come to a snap judgment
about the good and evil these bring into
people's lives
i do have sympathy for the fact that
there are many people
for whom prostitution is the only kind
of sexuality
they can ever be involved in that may
really be their whole social life
in the same sense that dr k describes
video game players who have no other
friends no other social i actually do
think these are quite difficult
questions people wrestle with and it's
not easy to conclude
whether or not going back to university
and studying to get mba is a waste of
your time it's not
at the top of this slide what i'm saying
is
friendship is a very difficult thing to
use
to justify your choices would dr k's
social excuse for playing video games
even make sense if we were trying to
excuse we were trying to
justify these much more social
activities
arguing that this activity gives you a
sense of community
seems to be a distraction from the
question of whether or not the act
itself
is good or bad or a waste of time
is it actually a good thing to play
video games is it actually a good thing
to play
a particular video game because we all
know they're not
created equal world of warcraft is not
the same
as starting up your atari 2600 and
playing asteroids
or is this a bad thing being justified
by
extrinsic inconsistent and irrelevant
factors you can ask this same question
really quite profoundly
about the prospect of going back to
university to get an mba
you can even ask it about vegan activism
so
to be very clear what i'm saying is even
if
friendship and having a sense of
community
is a legitimate reason to go back to
university and get an mba
right what if that is extrinsic
inconsistent and irrelevant right
like when you're actually sitting there
with a huge textbook
on your desk that says introduction to
commerce and finance finance
you've got to sit down and study that
for the exam right
it's it's irrelevant okay and again
talking about it being inconsistent
nobody's guaranteeing you nobody's
guaranteeing you that you're going to
have even
one friend that you made in spending
tens of thousands of dollars
and years of your life in a university
program if you look at this picture
i think it i think it tells the whole
story yes people do
people do engage in vegan activism for
the sake
of friendship for the sake of community
and they may even get deeper and deeper
into
animal rights extremism they may find
themselves involved in illegal
activities
and terrorism for the sake of
friendship for the sake of this sense of
community there were people in this
crowd in this photo
who went to this protest because they
wanted to spend time
with the girl in the pink shirt yes you
know
men get involved in politics to meet
women and women get involved in politics
to meet men
and people do it for friendship and
community and guess what
this is not a value neutral fact it's
actually bad and evil and wrong
attributing your decisions to the
quality of friendship
or to the community is just an evasion
of responsibility
for making the decision yourself is this
a good
political protest or not is getting an
mba a good idea
or not is drinking alcohol a waste of my
time
and talent or not you have to evaluate
the activity
you have to evaluate the decision the
commitment you're making
on its own terms and looking in the
mirror evaluating who
you are because this isn't just about
some random person's
time and talent is this a waste of your
talent
is there something better you could be
doing than enrolling in that mba program
or standing around and holding a sign at
this protest right
the answer well all my friends are doing
it and i want to be part of this
community
is the wrong answer and i think it's
obvious to everyone if you're talking
about joining a religious cult
getting involved with terrorism or
something that this way of thinking is
really bad and evil and dangerous and
wrong
but it seems like the example of
devoting like six hours a day to playing
video games
it seems that somehow that doesn't raise
the same
questions and concerns perhaps just
because we perceive video game playing
as childish and childlike
but if you're an adult devoting your
time to this from my perspective it's
just as deadly serious
as enrolling in an mba program getting
involved political activism
or becoming a gambler becoming an
alcoholic
i'm going to refer to this as the empty
church
phenomenon imagine you have a friend
who's lost his faith in mormonism or any
other mainstream religion
but they tell you that they continue
going to church for the sake of
friendship
for the sake of this sense of community
going to church for other people
does not make sense all you're doing is
letting those people make the decision
for you
oh well i don't really know what the
point of this political protest is
i don't know what this activism is going
to accomplish but i'm doing this for
these other
really you're doing it for other people
it's other people why don't you do your
thinking for yourself
right if you really believe in the
mormon faith if you really believe when
you pray
that that god has listened listed you
okay that's a reason to go to church
right you're going to an empty church
you're going to church that's full of
people
but there's no god there okay that
doesn't make sense
you have to make this decision for
yourself playing video games
for other people does not make sense
good or bad at what point do you take
responsibility
for making the decision for yourself the
extent of the negative impact of these
habits
may only be self-evident relative to
some
clearly stated goal now to be clear
that doesn't mean that there aren't
negative impacts in other contexts
but we tend to think about these things
relative to goals and when we when we
add particular goals to the equation
then the negative impacts become
self-evident
number one if someone claims that
occasional cocaine use
is harmless is it harmless for a police
officer
if you want your career to be as
a police officer in public service
is it really harmless for you to use
cocaine
say once a month now each and every one
of us
has some responsibilities in life some
aspirations in life
some ambitions that may be very
different
from being a police officer but what i'd
like to suggest to you is that if you
really just think it through
you will realize that the police officer
has commitments
that make it unacceptable for him to be
an occasional cocaine user
you also have commitments that make it
unacceptable or you ought to
number two if someone claims that
gambling betting on sports is harmless
is it harmless for an athlete
same pattern of thought number three is
drinking alcohol
harmless for a pilot number four or any
of these things
harmless for a parent you're just
talking about someone who has a
full-time job
and they're raising a kid did they have
a weekend to spare
every month to use cocaine did they have
three hours six hours on friday or
saturday
to go to a casino and gamble is that
just for a normal person
who has a job full-time job and they
were supposed to be spending the rest of
the time
raising educating caring for the kids is
that harmless
do they have time to be an alcoholic or
have you ever most parents have to quit
all this stuff because of your
commitments right and now obviously what
i'm asking you is
is it compatible with playing video
games in my in my opinion
no it's it's just not possible to
justify
playing video games for three hours a
day
if you want to get into talking about
five minutes a day you know
obviously the the quality of the
question changes
as we adjust the quantity the positive
aspects of
video game friendships according to dr k
are number one that they're not based on
appearances number two
that they're not based on wealth number
three that they're not based on
geography
and number four they reflect some kind
of deep knowledge
of who you really are he paints this
beautiful inspirational picture
which probably relates to his own
experience in life
of the contrast between meeting people
face to face
and they judge you in your appearance
they judge you on your ethnicity they
judge you on how attractive you are
they judge you based on your wealth your
social class your education
and where geography is this great
limiting factor to who becomes your
friends and he sees video games as
liberating us in this week can we not
think through
really counter-arguments this do you
think nobody is on twitch
right now trying to be friends with
somebody because they're appearance
you don't think being beautiful or
attractive
matters in terms of who is pursued who
has friends and who is alone
within the world of video gaming yes
twitch broadcasting
may be an extreme example but it's
indicative
i remember people telling me uh that
this was in the old days everquest which
i've never played
and everyone was desperately trying to
be friends with you know the
tiny minority of attractive women uh who
are within the game and so on
you know or women of the right age you
know sadly i mean the claim that
friendship made through video games will
necessarily be
profound or disregard these factors
you know to say there are arguments to
the contrary or instance
contrary is an understatement but
even if these four points were true
would these would these factors justify
spending your time surrounded by a
friend group who are a bunch of drunks
who are a bunch of gamblers say well i
know these guys who are into drinking
and gambling and prostitution
and because they don't judge me based on
my appearance they don't judge me based
on my wealth
and they know me foreign i'm gonna keep
on drinking and gambling and living this
dis
lifestyle because that's my friend group
do you see what you're doing there
you're refusing to make the judgment for
yourself is is drinking
alcohol good or bad is gambling good or
bad is this going to be part of your
life
yes or no it's your decision it's your
responsibility
don't shift that responsibility onto
your friend group
not even if you have this friend group
that you know never judged you based on
your appearance or your wealth
which are you know those are wonderful
things that dr k
talks about and he gives this wonderful
picture of how playing
massively multiplayer online games will
bring these friends drive but are you
kidding
what percentage of video game players
don't have any such
meaningful friendships online or offline
do you really never talk to him he has a
practice where he's giving these people
therapy
do you really not know anyone as a video
game addict who lacks
precisely these types of friendships and
they lack them precisely because
they're addicted to video games
therefore dr k concludes
people should not quit video games
because they will lose some
or all of their most important friends
and the people should instead seek a
balanced life
that includes video games but not
addiction
his own definition of a balanced life
will be discussed below so here the
problem becomes
even more philosophically interesting dr
k's model of the balanced
meaningful life is one
often unattainable and too incompatible
with adult video game playing so
casually he says
get a job that's intellectually
rewarding
most people can't not
now not ever now i'll just digress to
mention
i have many many videos criticizing
jordan peterson
i have a very low opinion of jordan
peterson
i dislike his philosophy i disagree with
many of the things he says
however jordan peterson is one of the
few people i've ever heard
talk honestly about the fact that the
vast majority of people
will never have an intellectually
rewarding job like the vast majority of
people
on planet earth if you want something
intellectually rewarding and meaningful
it's not going to be
your job and he points out that he
himself is in the
tiny minority of people who are
exceptions to that rule like there's
some intellectual component to his job
i can say that for myself too as a
youtuber making this video but for most
people you have to recognize
whatever is going to be intellectually
rewarding in their lives is going to
transpire in those
few hours when they're not busy with
their job when they're not busy raising
their kids
or maybe taking care of their
grandparents or shopping or showering or
all the things right
it is a lie to say to really anyone
that they can get an intellectually
rewarding job if we switch
the frame of reference to some exotic
culture
this suddenly becomes clearer i've been
in villages
in cambodia i've been in villages in
laos
where everyone's a rice farmer you want
to know your career options in life
farming rice period oh your father's a
rice farmer
you're going to be a rice farmer if this
stereotype
seems too extreme or unreasonable to you
i could challenge you also to just look
at the job listings in a country like
cambodia but hey
you might as well look up the job
listings in the city where you're living
right now and scroll down
through the jobs that are hiring and ask
yourself how many of those jobs are
intellectually awarding
and how many could the average person
ever
possibly hope to apply for and attain if
they
are intellectually rewarding so likewise
very rapidly
he says oh get meaningful friendships
most people can't
i'm here tempted to digress into a whole
lengthy autobiographical set of
reflections
it would have been reasonable for me to
assume that going to university
to study the politics and history of
asia i would have made friends with
other people
who share that interest with me other
people who interested in the politics of
history and asia
back when i was studying buddhist
philosophy i should have had all kinds
of friends who lasted the rest of my
life are interested in buddhist
philosophy when i was involved in vegan
activism
no this is not guaranteed okay and
it's such an understatement to say it's
not guaranteed it's unbelievably rare
to meet someone connect with someone and
stay connected to someone
who's a meaningful friend you might as
well just say to somebody
who's going to have sex with prostitutes
on a regular basis
let's say it's somebody who has never
had any other kind of relationship
other than sleeping with brothers oh
well why don't you just stop sleeping
with prostitutes
and find true love well true love
is not easily attainable it's incredibly
rare
to even have a chance at true love is
incredibly rare so invoking these ideas
like getting an intellectual rewarding
job or finding meaningful friendships
as if there are things you can do just
as simply as turning off
a video game console as if they were
even as easy
as quitting alcohol or quitting cocaine
things i admit are
difficult to do no this is hard
and to be blunt it's highly improbable
this aspect of dr k's approach is summed
up when he says things like
get your confidence from meaningful
accomplishments in the real world
instead of video games let's be honest
most people
can't and i'm not just talking about
teenagers here
most people whether they're in their 20s
30s 40s
they have no meaningful accomplishments
they never
will have any meaningful accomplishments
so we got to talk about living a life
in the absence of meaningful
accomplishments in the same sense that
we have to talk about leading a
meaningful life
in the absence of ever having this kind
of intellectually rewarding job
his whole model of building a life
that's worth
living requires things that are
unattainable
for most people i know i invoked the
image before of someone who is a rice
farmer in a small town in cambodia or
laos
okay it may seem hard to relate to but
the vast majority of us
in our way are rice farmers we're born
into circumstances
we had no choice about we have no
control over
and we're stuck with very few viable
career paths in front of us
most of us live our lives with the
consequences of decisions that were made
for us sometimes by the generation
immediately prior by our own parents
sometimes by circumstances that have
been accumulating for generations
now at the bottom of the screen i ask
again do you think
you can raise a child if you play video
games for just three hours per day
and let's ask more broadly what can you
do
if you play video games for three hours
a day and we assume you have a job and
you've got to buy groceries you've got a
shower
three hours per day it's probably
all that you've got to give so maybe
this idea
which is quite appealing of building a
life that's worth living
maybe what we have to face up to is that
it is actually
incompatible with adults playing video
games that playing video games
will preclude the possibility of you
having a meaningful life
so to sum up his overall argument
is that we shouldn't contrast video game
addiction
to quitting instead we should contrast
this appealing prospect
of building a meaningful life we should
build a meaningful life
and then playing video games will become
a positive part of this life
all of the other elements will so to
speak come into
balance the strongest part of his
approach is his critique of mainstream
therapy
he points out i think quite reasonably
that they have a tradition
of coaching people and counseling people
evolved in response to
alcoholism and chemical addictions and
that in general the advice and help
you're going to get from a therapist
is not terribly useful for quitting or
managing video game addiction
that in general the type of advice to be
found in textbooks
in his field and the type of advice
you're going to get from people in his
field
is pretty much irrelevant to the problem
at hand
the greatest disadvantage of his
approach is that his criteria
for identifying both what is good and
what is bad about video gaming
are external to and are relevant to
the playing of video games as such so
this is subtle
many of you might not have noticed this
but what he says is that playing video
games
is only a problem if it causes other
problems that is issuing the question
that is a refusal to evaluate what's
good and bad about
video gaming as such what he says again
and again
i'm not putting words in his mouth
openly is that
when playing video games causes problems
for your career
causes problems in your work life when
playing video games
causes conflict within your family when
causes health problems then and only
then
playing video games is a problem then
and only to that extent
playing video games as a pro he claims
that the benefits of video games
are friendship but this is no more
guaranteed
by the game itself than it is by
enrolling in an mba
as we said before so what's it going to
be dr k
at what point do we evaluate
video games as such the good and the bad
of them the problems caused by them
without misdirecting the audience to
consider
genuinely extraneous things like the
attainability of these elusive
friendships
or possible negative impacts on your
work your family your health no
i want to talk about video game playing
as such i want to talk about
the real problem here i don't want to
talk about
inessential extraneous benefits i don't
want to talk about inessential
extraneous
harms in offering criticism of this kind
i always take the time to do what i
consider
due diligence research i take the time
to check
is it possible that these few youtube
videos i saw
presented by the person i'm criticizing
misrepresent their work
someone makes youtube video talking
about how they dropped out of university
and they're happy about it and they
encourage you to drop out of university
also
but if you look around you might find
that they later made a video
saying the opposite saying that they
regret dropping out of university that
it was a rash decision
they may have made a later video saying
that they're going back to university
in this way i really do try to get a
sense
of the person's whole message of their
whole business
what it is they're selling here on
youtube
before i publish a criticism this kind
in this case i have to say i was shocked
i was really shocked when i took the
time to check
what was going on within the discord
run by dr k what i found
is that the barely perceptible strain
of watered-down hindu spirituality
found on his youtube channel is revealed
to be a truly cult-like trap
drawing in recruiting and converting
young people yes but people of all ages
who are at a vulnerable time in their
lives where they need help
they need guidance because they're
struggling with video game edition
or these other issues that he discusses
on his youtube channel
the question i put to the people in his
discord
would this be acceptable if they were a
man
with a phd with similar credentials
doing similar counseling who was then
drawing people in
and presenting them in the same way
with the truths the doctrines the
practices
of scientology or of islam
would you guys feel comfortable with
what you've got going on here
about so-called
hindu spirituality very real religious
practices
and people being drawn in and being
given
meditation lessons i would say being
invited to participate in meditation
rituals
would you feel comfortable with this if
this were instead
someone with academic credibility
and seemingly medical expertise
drawing people in and recruiting them to
participate in islamic
or mormon practices
one of the people wrote back to me i was
very quickly silenced and kicked out
which is not surprising for a cult group
someone else
someone who claimed to be a buddhist
monk actually just posted a link
to a single scientific study a study i
could very easily debunk saying that
meditation is uh scientifically valid
i was not allowed to respond to this or
engage in a discussion about it
you know i said no no no no you guys are
mistaken people were writing back to me
saying oh
well they do this hindu stuff they do
this buddhist stuff they draw people
into this
but all of it's scientifically valid i
said no you don't realize
that's what the scientologists say
scientology also recruits people into
their cult
claiming that it's scientifically about
the people who sell
transcendental meditation it's normally
just called tm
transformation overtly hindu culture
they have decades and decades of
recruiting people with
pseudo-scientific claims presenting
their religious practice as scientific
and guys you may not have that much
experience with islam it's quite common
in islam too there are really strong
arguments presented by muslims
that islam is the religion of science
that it's science that proves that the
quran is correct
there's a whole discourse there that for
some people
is powerful and convincing or lures them
into accepting the religion
and maybe later they realize that this
isn't scientifically valid at all
or maybe they live with that illusion
their whole life is long but above all
seeing as quitting video games
is the locus classicus for this
discussion today
do you not know there are people who
claim it's a simple scientific fact that
playing video games benefits you that
playing video games makes you more
intelligent that has been scientifically
proven
to have these kinds of cognitive efforts
and do not know the opposite
that there are people who claim that
playing video games does terrible harm
to you
mentally emotionally and otherwise and
that this has been simply proven
the discussion of the effects of video
games in our lives is itself a great
example
of pseudoscience and innuendo
being presented as science will his
advice help people
or harm people to give you a parallel
answer
really awful diet advice on the internet
can still help people
because it's part of the process of them
taking a personal interest in
and showing initiative in trying to
improve their health
somebody who's already taken the step to
come on youtube
and look for advice about how to improve
their diet how to lose weight how to
improve their health they may benefit
from discussions
about how to do that even if every
element of the advice is wrong
the problem is this irrelevant health
advice
may be part of the process of people
helping themselves
or it may provide excuses
for them to continue in their bad habits
so it may be harmless for you to watch a
video that tells you that you should
have
zero added salt in your diet to solve a
particular health problem and improve
your health
and you get committed to this zero salt
diet
and that just may be part and parcel of
you making the effort to pay more
attention to what you eat
pay more attention to the balance of
calories and exercise and this sort of
thing
and therefore the fundamentally bad or
relevant advice that you should be
avoiding salt
it may be part and parcel of a positive
process of your life
or or you may eat
tremendously unhealthy foods and make
excuses for the fact
that you're still gaining weight not
achieving your goals the advice isn't
working that your health is even
deteriorating
because you've taken this irrelevant
criterion of avoiding salt
you've elevated it to being the most
important thing in how you plan your
diet
and then you're ignoring all kinds of
obvious questions and yes by the way
tragically i do know people who followed
crazy diets they got the internet
sadly these examples really do have
consequences of the real world
i end the video with criticism of dr k
that definitely applies to some of the
advice you will find on my own youtube
channel
i'm always interested in criticizing my
own approach to these problems
when i criticize others what if
having a meaningful life is a dangerous
irrelevant criterion to bring into these
discussions in the first place
so i have on screen one person asked the
other well i have to develop a
meaningful life like dr k
says and then my indulgence
or addiction will come into balance you
see what's happening here
they're not interested in dealing with
the particular addiction
or the particular indulgence instead
they've gotten motivated by this idea or
this ideal of pursuing a meaningful life
and they're expecting video games to
cease to be a problem once they've
achieved that
and the other person answering no you
just need to quit now
deal with the consequences later waiting
on the attainment
of this meaningful life is irrelevant
and what if it's actually a dangerous
distraction
no just recognize that this particular
indulgence or this particular addiction
is bad and quit now quit drinking now
quit gambling now quit prostitution now
quit playing video games now
in some ways it's a positive thing that
i put together the first ninety percent
of this video
unaware of the depth of dr k's
involvement in peddling a corrupt
form of hinduism a corrupt form of
buddhism
spiritual practices that i would
consider not cult-like
but to be blunt an actual cult
it's convenient because i presented the
first ninety percent of this video
without an awareness of the real danger
that dr k
presents to those who are taken in by
the veneer of scientific
and academic respectability i'm sorry
that i have to conclude this video
by saying that this is another dangerous
man
presenting himself as innocuous
recruiting people into a cult
by pretending that he cares by
pretending
that he's just trying to help